GSoC Docker Quickstart Project Blog (#6634)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2023/08/24/2023-08-24-gsoc-docker-based-quickstart.adoc

* This also applies to tutorials that utilize the same Docker setup as mentioned above. After cloning the repository, users will only need to execute `docker-compose up -d <keyword>`.
* Additionally, users can take advantage of a one-click setup using Gitpod to easily experience Jenkins.
* Currently, these Docker Compose files undergo regular testing via GitHub Actions. We plan to transition this process to Jenkins in the near future.

== Phase 1

During Phase 1, we aimed to accomplish this objective using scripts. We developed `jenkins_init.sh` and `jenkins_teardown.sh` scripts to initiate and stop the containers. Additionally, we crafted scripts for SSH key generation and the cloning/forking of repositories.

Throughout Phase 1, I gained insights into:

* Optimal Git and GitHub practices
* Effective conflict resolution in merging
* The structure of the Jenkins file system
* Creation and utilization of Docker Compose files
* Crafting of shell scripts
* Building Dockerfiles
* Understanding of SSH key mechanisms
* Navigating the functionality of Gitpod
* Composing technical documentation

> Feel free to explore my midterm recap blog post [here](https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2023/07/22/gsoc-2023-midterm/) and watch my midterm presentation recording [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W4eSVCTmqb8).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to explore my midterm recap blog post link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2023/07/22/gsoc-2023-midterm/[here] and watch my midterm presentation recording link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W4eSVCTmqb8[here].
```

Please fix the format

> Feel free to explore my midterm recap blog post link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2023/07/22/gsoc-2023-midterm/[here] and watch my midterm presentation recording link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W4eSVCTmqb8[here].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Feel free to explore my midterm recap blog post link:/blog/2023/07/22/gsoc-2023-midterm/[here] and watch my midterm presentation recording link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W4eSVCTmqb8[here].
```

Another crucial aspect of the project was automated testing, which introduced me to GitHub Actions, a tool I hadn't previously been acquainted with. GitHub Actions were employed to test the functionality of Docker Compose files, facilitate the uploading of Docker images to Docker Hub, perform plugin updates, and manage various other tasks.

During Phase 2, my learning encompassed:

* Docker Compose files
* GitHub Actions
* The Jenkins Remote Access API

== Next Steps

The upcoming steps for the project involve:

- Full integration into jenkins.io.
- Transitioning from GitHub Actions to jenkins.ci.
- Incorporating the repository into Hacktoberfest with "good first issues" to engage beginner contributors.
- As a stretch goal, expanding the project with additional tutorials.

== Acknowledgments

> I am grateful for the guidance and support provided throughout this project from my mentors author:gounthar[Bruno Verachten], author:berviantoleo[Bervianto Leo Pratama] and author:jmmeessen[Jean-Marc Meessen].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I am grateful for the guidance and support provided throughout this project from my mentors author:gounthar[Bruno Verachten], author:berviantoleo[Bervianto Leo Pratama], and author:jmmeessen[Jean-Marc Meessen].
```
adding oxford comma

== Useful Links

- link:https://github.com/ash-sxn/GSoC-2023-docker-based-quickstart[GitHub repository]

> - link:https://www.jenkins.io/projects/gsoc/2023/projects/docker-compose-build/[Project Selection Post]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- link:/projects/gsoc/2023/projects/docker-compose-build/[Project Selection Post]
```

---
layout: post
title: "Docker-based Jenkins quick start examples"
:tags:
- gsoc
- gsoc2023
- docker
- docker-compose
- gitpod
- documentation
author: ash-sxn
description: "Google Summer of Code 2023 Docker-based Jenkins quick start examples."
opengraph:
  image: /images/gsoc/opengraph.png
---

image:/images/gsoc/jenkins-gsoc-logo_small.png[Jenkins GSoC, role=center, float=right]

== Table of Contents

. <<About the Project>>
. <<Phase 1>>
. <<Phase 2>>
. <<Next Steps>>
. <<Acknowledgments>>
. <<Useful Links>>

== About the Project

The goal of my project was to address the problems and complexities users often face when setting up Jenkins with Docker. The current process involves multiple intimidating steps with security risks. My goal was to solve this problem with Docker Compose by creating a Docker Compose file and regularly testing it. Part of the project also involved adding easy-to-understand documentation and tutorials, as well as a one-click Gitpod setup.

What will changed in Jenkins after this project:

> * Previously, users had to use six scary commands to set up Jenkins with Docker (take a look link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/installing/docker/#on-macos-and-linux[here]). After this project, users will only need two commands: `git clone URL` and `docker-compose up -d`.

Reviewer: We might need to screenshot or give snippets because that document/link is a living document. This means the document can be changed later, and the reader will lose the context.

== Phase 2

During Phase 2, the focus shifted to integrating Windows as well since the shell scripts from Phase 1 wouldn't work without WSL on Windows. That's when we discovered profiles in Docker Compose, which turned out to be perfect for this; the tutorials worked just like our previous scripts with keywords.

Another part of the project was automated testing, for which I learned about GitHub Actions (which I didn't know before). It's used for testing the working of Docker Compose files, uploading Docker images to Docker Hub, updating plugins, and some other things.

In Phase 2, I learned about:

* Docker Compose files
* GitHub Actions
* The Jenkins Remote Access API

== Next Steps

The upcoming steps for the project include:

- Fully integrating it into jenkins.io.
- Shifting from using GitHub Actions to jenkins.ci.
- Adding the repo to Hacktoberfest with good first issues for beginner contributors.
- Another stretch goal is to add more tutorials to the project.

== Acknowledgments

> I am grateful for the guidance and support provided throughout this project from my mentors author:gounthar[Bruno Verachten], author:berviantoleo[Bervianto Leo Pratama] and author:jmmeessen[Jean-Marc Meessen]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
I am grateful for the guidance and support provided throughout this project from my mentors author:gounthar[Bruno Verachten], author:berviantoleo[Bervianto Leo Pratama] and author:jmmeessen[Jean-Marc Meessen].
```

== Useful Links

- link:https://github.com/ash-sxn/GSoC-2023-docker-based-quickstart[GitHub repository]
- link:https://www.jenkins.io/projects/gsoc/2023/projects/docker-compose-build/[Project Selection Post]
- link:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZpPihadYqpAvR20rxZkTD2SVpf34E6YMzg6opU6yHAg/edit#heading=h.lntg56ljm653[Proposal]
- link:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yij9OvM2_92My3vqjn6u8ABHjXcyy0a7O6oM30b6ctM/edit[Project specific office hours meeting notes]
- link:https://matrix.to/#/#gsoc-2023-docker-quickstart:matrix.org[Gitter Channel]
- link:https://community.jenkins.io/t/docker-quick-start-examples-gsoc-2023/7479[Recordings of these weekly project meetings ]

== Conclusion

> In conclusion, participating in GSoC 2023 was an incredible experience that allowed me to learn new skills and contribute to an open-source project. I am grateful for the opportunity and would like to thank my mentors and the Jenkins community for their support and guidance. I look forward to continuing to contribute

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In conclusion, participating in GSoC 2023 was an incredible experience that allowed me to learn new skills and contribute to an open-source project. I am grateful for the opportunity and would like to thank my mentors and the Jenkins community for their support and guidance. I look forward to continuing to contribute.
```

---
layout: post
title: "Docker-based Jenkins quick start examples"
:tags:
- gsoc
- gsoc2023
- docker
- docker-compose
- gitpod
- documentation
author: ash-sxn
description: "Google Summer of Code 2023 Docker-based Jenkins quick start examples."
opengraph:
  image: /images/gsoc/opengraph.png
---

image:/images/gsoc/jenkins-gsoc-logo_small.png[Jenkins GSoC, role=center, float=right]

== Table of Contents

. <<About the Project>>
. <<Phase 1>>
. <<Phase 2>>
. <<Next Steps>>
. <<Acknowledgments>>
. <<Useful Links>>

== About the Project

> The goal of my project was to address the problems and complexities users often face when setting up Jenkins with Docker. The current process involves multiple intimidating steps with security risks. My goal was to solve this problem with Docker Compose by creating a Docker Compose file and regularly testing it. Part of the project also involved adding easy-to-understand documentation and tutorials, as well as a one-click Gitpod setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The aim of my project was to tackle the challenges and intricacies that users frequently encounter when configuring Jenkins with Docker. The current process comprises numerous daunting steps associated with security risks. My objective was to resolve this issue using Docker Compose, by crafting a Docker Compose file and conducting regular testing. Furthermore, the project encompassed the creation of user-friendly documentation, tutorials, and a streamlined Gitpod setup, accessible with just one click.
```

> What will changed in Jenkins after this project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What will change in Jenkins after this project:
```

> * Previously, users had to use six scary commands to set up Jenkins with Docker. which looks like this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Previously, users had to use six intimidating commands to set up Jenkins with Docker, which appeared as follows:
* ```

image:../../../images/post-images/2023/08/24/2023-08-24-Screenshot_01.png[Screenshot 01]
image:../../../images/post-images/2023/08/24/2023-08-24-Screenshot_02.png[Screenshot 02]
image:../../../images/post-images/2023/08/24/2023-08-24-Screenshot_03.png[Screenshot 03]

After this project, users will only need two commands: `git clone URL` and `docker-compose up -d`.
* The same applies to tutorials that use the same Docker setup as above; users will only need to use `docker-compose up -d <keyword>` after cloning the repo.
* Users can now use a one-click setup with Gitpod to experience Jenkins.

> * These Docker Compose files are being tested regularly with GitHub Actions right now, we will move it to Jenkins later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After this project, users will only need two commands: `git clone URL` and `docker-compose up -d`.
* This also applies to tutorials that utilize the same Docker setup as mentioned above. After cloning the repository, users will only need to execute `docker-compose up -d <keyword>`.
* Additionally, users can take advantage of a one-click setup using Gitpod to easily experience Jenkins.
* Currently, these Docker Compose files undergo regular testing via GitHub Actions. We plan to transition this process to Jenkins in the near future.
```

== Phase 1

> In Phase 1, we tried to achieve this outcome with scripts. We created `jenkins_init.sh` and `jenkins_teardown.sh` scripts for running and stopping the containers, as well as other scripts for SSH key generation and cloning/forking repos.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During Phase 1, we aimed to accomplish this objective using scripts. We developed `jenkins_init.sh` and `jenkins_teardown.sh` scripts to initiate and stop the containers. Additionally, we crafted scripts for SSH key generation and the cloning/forking of repositories.
```

> During Phase 1, I learned about:
> 
> * Git and GitHub best practices
> * Resolving merge conflicts
> * The Jenkins file system
> * Docker Compose files
> * Shell scripts
> * Dockerfiles
> * How SSH keys work
> * How Gitpod works
> * How to write technical documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Throughout Phase 1, I gained insights into:

* Optimal Git and GitHub practices
* Effective conflict resolution in merging
* The structure of the Jenkins file system
* Creation and utilization of Docker Compose files
* Crafting of shell scripts
* Building Dockerfiles
* Understanding of SSH key mechanisms
* Navigating the functionality of Gitpod
* Composing technical documentation
```

> You can check out my midterm recap blog post link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2023/07/22/gsoc-2023-midterm/[here] and my midterm presentation recording link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W4eSVCTmqb8[here].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Feel free to explore my midterm recap blog post [here](https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2023/07/22/gsoc-2023-midterm/) and watch my midterm presentation recording [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W4eSVCTmqb8).
```

== Phase 2

> During Phase 2, the focus shifted to integrating Windows as well since the shell scripts from Phase 1 wouldn't work without WSL on Windows. That's when we discovered profiles in Docker Compose, which turned out to be perfect for this; the tutorials worked just like our previous scripts with keywords.
> 
> Another part of the project was automated testing, for which I learned about GitHub Actions (which I didn't know before). It's used for testing the working of Docker Compose files, uploading Docker images to Docker Hub, updating plugins, and some other things.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Phase 2, our focus shifted towards integrating Windows as well, given that the shell scripts from Phase 1 were incompatible without Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL). During this phase, we uncovered the utility of Docker Compose profiles, which turned out to be an excellent solution. These profiles allowed the tutorials to function similarly to our previous scripts, employing designated keywords.

Another crucial aspect of the project was automated testing, which introduced me to GitHub Actions, a tool I hadn't previously been acquainted with. GitHub Actions were employed to test the functionality of Docker Compose files, facilitate the uploading of Docker images to Docker Hub, perform plugin updates, and manage various other tasks.
```

> In Phase 2, I learned about:
> 
> * Docker Compose files
> * GitHub Actions
> * The Jenkins Remote Access API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During Phase 2, my learning encompassed:

* Docker Compose files
* GitHub Actions
* The Jenkins Remote Access API
```

== Next Steps

> The upcoming steps for the project include:
> 
> - Fully integrating it into jenkins.io.
> - Shifting from using GitHub Actions to jenkins.ci.
> - Adding the repo to Hacktoberfest with good first issues for beginner contributors.
> - Another stretch goal is to add more tutorials to the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The upcoming steps for the project involve:

- Full integration into jenkins.io.
- Transitioning from GitHub Actions to jenkins.ci.
- Incorporating the repository into Hacktoberfest with "good first issues" to engage beginner contributors.
- As a stretch goal, expanding the project with additional tutorials.
```
